---
layout: post
title: "Kossel XL 3D printer."
author: "Anton"
---

{% capture images_path %}
assets/images/posts/{{ page.path | split:"/" | last | split:"." | first }}
{% endcapture %}

### Table of contents
1. [Intro](#intro)
2. [Frame](#frame)
3. [Rods](#rods)
3. [Carriages and effector](#carriages_effector)
4. [First-time assembly](#first_time_assembly)
5. [Heatbed](#heatbed)
6. [Autoleveling](#autoleveling)
7. [What's next?](#whatsnext)
8. [Outro](#outro)

### Intro <a name="intro"></a>

<!--excerpt-->

Since childhood, I have been deeply frustrated by the imperfection of my own hands. And it's not just me; it's the inherent biomechanics 
of human beings. If you've ever tried to create something with your own hands, you understand well that the results are rarely flawless. 
Our muscles lack the precision to control our limbs consistently, and our sense of sight is far from perfect. There are two paths to 
overcome these difficulties: extensively honing our own skills (which may lead to some level of success, but the limitations of our bodies 
will always hinder further progress), or transferring these challenges to machines. I have chosen the second path.

There are two fundamental approaches that allow us to obtain the desired object:

1. One can take a raw material and remove the excess to shape it. This path is followed by CNC milling machines.
2. Conversely, one can do the opposite—instead of cutting away, we can simply grow the desired object layer by layer using the appropriate 
material. This is the path of 3D printers.

When 3D printers first emerged, I considered them mere toys. At that time, I had a much greater affinity for CNC milling machines. The 
advantages seemed obvious: CNC milling machines could work with virtually any material, including metals. And from metals, one could create 
substantial objects—strong and lightweight. But what could printers do? They were limited to plastic materials and producing layer-by-layer 
constructions. How could one guarantee that the layers would adhere properly?

I was mistaken. Looking ahead, I can now confidently say the following: printed parts can be surprisingly durable, even when they consist 
mostly of hollow structures—with only the outer surfaces solid, while the internal structure remains lattice-like.

However, when I started building this printer, I still believed it would be nothing more than a toy, not particularly useful for practical 
applications. I began constructing it simply to alleviate boredom.

For reasons that may no longer seem compelling enough to mention, an unconventional kinematic system was chosen. I didn't want to develop 
a design from scratch, so I opted for an open-source framework as the foundation—the Kossel XL.

### Frame <a name="frame"></a>

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="frame1.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="frame2.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="frame3.jpg" %}

### Rods <a name="rods"></a>

I had some bad luck with carbon tubes for the rods. The diameter of the holes in them is 3 mm, while the ball joints have M4 threads. 
I decided to use trimmed M3 screws as connectors. I had to epoxy them into the ball joints:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="rods1.jpg" %}

Afterward, I selected the longest carbon tube and made the first rod:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="rods2.jpg" %}

Once the first rod was ready, I needed to create a template to manufacture the rest of them (to ensure that all rods have the same length). 
I 3D printed a couple of fixtures for this purpose:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="rods3.jpg" %}

I secured the fixtures onto the profile, using the first rod as a guide:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="rods4.jpg" %}

Using this template, I then glued the remaining rods:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="rods5.jpg" %}

### Carriages and effector <a name="carriages_effector"></a>

For convenience, I have created a complete printer model in SolidWorks:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="printer_assembly.png" %}

I have designed 3D models of the effector and carriages:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="carriage_model.png" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="effector_model.png" %}

They have been manufactured using aluminum:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="parts1.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="parts2.jpg" %}

### First-time assembly <a name="first_time_assembly"></a>

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="assembly1.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="assembly2.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="assembly3.jpg" %}

### Heatbed <a name="heatbed"></a>

I failed to find a suitable heated bed for sale (the requirements were: sufficient power and 220 volts), so I decided to make it myself. I used
PTC heaters, here is the specification:

1. Operating temperature - 200°C (regulated by a thyristor power controller).
2. Power - 200W.

To begin with, the positioning of the heating elements needed to be determined. The objective was to achieve optimal heating uniformity. Thermal 
modeling was performed in SolidWorks. As a result, the following configuration was arrived at, ensuring a minimal temperature variation of only 
a few degrees Celsius:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="heatbed3.jpg" %}

Next, a 3D model was created in SolidWorks:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="table_exploded.png" %}

To further reduce heating time and prevent heat loss, a cork enclosure was installed underneath (constructed with multiple layers of cork approximately 
2 mm thick, bonded together with high-temperature silicone sealant):

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="heatbed2.jpg" %}

Here is the PCB through which the heating elements can be connected to the power controller (also featuring a connector for the thermistor):

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="heatbed1.jpg" %}

Here is the final result:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="table_top.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="table_bottom.jpg" %}

### Autoleveling <a name="autoleveling"></a>

A sensor was needed to detect the moment when the nozzle touches the bed. Among the existing solutions, I was only intrigued by the expensive 
FSR (Force-Sensing Resistor) option. However, a friend of mine[] suggested an alternative - piezoelectric elements, which are super affordable on AliExpress. 
Further online research revealed similar projects already in existence, so there was no need to reinvent the wheel. I shamelessly borrowed the circuitry 
from one of those projects, with some modifications, such as replacing the costly operational amplifiers with more affordable rail-to-rail alternatives 
that could operate at the required voltage. Additionally, I enhanced the input protection. The final design took shape as follows:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="autoleveling1.png" %}

Assembled:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="autoleveling2.jpg" %}
{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="autoleveling3.jpg" %}

A short test video (focus your attention on the green LED located on the PCB on the right):

{% include youtube.html id="Ikyw4o_hFkg" width="100%" %}

### What's next? <a name="whatsnext"></a>

Just when everything was nearly complete, an unpleasant realization emerged: the frame that had been constructed posed difficulties in securing the 
enclosure (thermal chamber) onto it. In my attempts to resolve this issue, I created several prototypes in SolidWorks, but none of them satisfied me 
for various reasons. Here they are, presented below:

**Version 1.1**: the standard frame with a thermal chamber made of bent aluminium mounted on top, with the electronics mounted above:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="prototype_1_1.png" %}

**Version 1.2**: an attempt to position the electronics underneath using standard frame components:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="prototype_1_2.png" %}

**Version 1.3**: the standard frame with a thermal chamber constructed from separate aluminum plates (instead of bending):

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="prototype_1_3.png" %}

**Version 1.4**: a frame entirely made from bent steel sheets, eliminating the use of aluminum profiles:

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="prototype_1_4.png" %}

**Version 1.5**: the standard frame with ABS 3D-printed corner components for the enclosure inspired by the idea from [here](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=w0yofVDWWnc)):

{% include clickableImage.html path=images_path name="prototype_1_5.png" %}

Regrettably, the ideal solution that would satisfy my requirements has yet to materialize (by the way, as I write this article, I am 
contemplating another iteration). However, if it does come to fruition, rest assured that there will be a continuation to this narrative.

### Outro <a name="outro"></a>

Unfortunately, this project was never fully completed. The rapid advancement of 3D printers meant that while I was deliberating over the 
thermal chamber design, many aspects of this project became outdated. Nevertheless, this project undeniably holds great value as it has 
provided me with a wealth of knowledge and newfound experience.
